this talk is about gyein gardening
that's it's giving us all I hope some
tips about world making from a guy in
perspective I want to start with a story
when I was a graduate student in theater
at Ohio State University
I shared a garden plot with my advisor
so we'd go out there and work and sweat
him and be sore from too much water
hauling in too much discourse but we got
such great thinking done out in the
garden one day we were out there and he
told me the story about his father
his father had been the warden of a low
security prison farm in northern Indiana
where where the the product was peas
because frozen food had just entered the
world as as an industry and if anybody
in this room has ever tasted canned peas
you know why peas were a prime candidate
to launch that business now his father
would go out just around harvest time
and he'd taste those suckers every two
hours just to make sure they were
perfect perfect and when they were
perfect
he rousted eight hundred prisoners to
get up and and haul in the harvest I
guess that's some kind of lesson in
perseverance let's drop back for a
minute and in the year 1900 50% of
Americans worked in agriculture in 2000
and that number had gone down to 2% it's
much lower now and it's been matched by
a decline in the awareness of how
agriculture works and arise and the
creation of processed foods and and the
obesity problem in the United States did
I unplug my screen I have done so
oh I just alright let's go back here
let's go back here alright alright
nope we've done it again yay alright
then so no yes so yes yes I say it has
been discovered by many recent studies
that most children in America don't know
where food comes from and about 30
percent of them think it comes from the
store
forty percent I know that hamburgers are
made out of cows if you've ever been
Hawaii
you've seen this shelf in the grocery
and around 2008 the oxford jr dictionary
editors this is a dictionary for
seven-year-olds and up decided to
replace nature words that they felt
we're no longer relevant to kids lives
with these words that they felt we're
more irrelevant so we're here to sued
come in why does it matter what does it
mean to be in right relationship with
plants with earth how am i tar recently
hatched new technologies aia r vr help
us illuminate some of those questions so
i'm going to come back to them but first
i want to talk a little bit about our
technologies our capabilities and our
intense I'll start with interactive
media and the notion of personal agency
when I was working at cyber vision in
1976 I was working on a little board
that connected to to a television and
you know before that the things you did
with your television were basically to
change the channel or adjust the rabbit
ears you're not old enough to know these
things I'm telling you now so this was
this device the cyber vision computer
had 2k of RAM and I was and it was
loaded from cassette tape so you could
load 2k and then you had to have a
converging node in the story which meant
that any
choice that a person made couldn't be
carried through in any kind of resilient
way you couldn't change the plot and I
started thinking about that it was
driving me nuts it's like well okay what
are the characteristics of significant
interaction anyway and that thinking
eventually led me to this notion that
there is a a principle of action in a
perfectly immersive interactive world
people could take action that would be
like like life more or less their
actions could change things so here's
how I initially formulated these ideas
so all systems natural are made have
constraints that will make it impossible
to max out all these variables but let's
look at them frequency how often can you
take action
right range what is the scope of
possible actions you can take
significance what is the potential
impact of your actions so on this scale
you can measure the robustness if you
will of interactions that you have
embedded in an interactive world or even
interactions with real people this is my
daughter on a trip to Zion with me years
ago and she would kill me for this I use
this silly picture to show you what I
mean by these interactive variables so
frequency here is is really decided by
her - am I going to do something range
well these these signs are indicators of
things one should not do these are
constraints are probably weak
constraints knowing how people behave in
national parks but here are a few others
within the range that that seem a little
off the wall you could actually go walk
on the trail you know you can go off the
range you could plant trees in the
forest and in terms of significance here
you could die so that's significant
right and here you might do something
that gets more important over time
because it's growing of course I lied to
you national parks will not let you come
in and plant trees at random but you
take my point and I had fun with
Photoshop
so this is another formulation of the
principle of action when can we have
robust personal agency and interactive
media so we perceive a world that is
larger than we can take action in
generally true of life right
so the worlds inside the place is where
we can take action well the first is
reality prime that's where we are I use
that phrase because real world has
become such a squishy idea you can also
put that embed the potential for those
kinds of actions significant robust
interactions in AR and VR so these
within the realm of the possibility for
robust personal interaction and then
there are these edge cases where it may
not happen interactive installations may
or may not be robustly interactive not
you can choose to fling yourself off of
a rollercoaster but that's not what I'm
talking about I'm talking about for
example me al wolf which was in the
beginning is something of an edge case
and is much less so now where although
you could wander at will and interact
with anything there was a story that you
were trying to work on trying to figure
through so at the bottom of it there
were these narrative constraints I think
that's changing at Meowth wolf and I'm
really excited about it and then there
are these types of media that you can't
do robust personal agency with okay so
linear narrative storytelling movies
plays of course there are exceptions
people have tried to do interactive
versions of all of these things but I
would call for example 360 movies an
edge case because you can navigate the
round of space but you can't do things
that change what happens in it or what
exists in it so that's my formulation
and that's what I mean by robust
interaction now let's just change gears
and talk for a minute about capability
and intent as these things relate to our
tool
and what we make with them excuse me so
this is a petroglyph at Zion again one
of my favorites and people you know
wonder what these petroglyphs mean
nobody has really decoded them but
something is going on here
there's a sandworm later you see ram's
there's a suggestion that it's a map a
pathway through the mountains that was
represented but the point I'm trying to
make here is that between the capability
of scratching on rocks and the intent to
first maybe being decorative and then
passing along information at those two
forces intertwine and weave and change
each other let me give you an example of
this kind of reciprocal causality and
let's look at the lens
the mighty lens so in the very last
breath of the 16th century Dutch the
lens makers were really going at it
people had fooled around with crude
telescopes and and lenses for hundreds
of years but the Dutch excellence in
lens making was really superior to
anything that had come before although
the English like to take issue with this
an idea that seized these Dutch guys was
about trade right they wanted to see the
ships coming in on the horizon with a
telescope because if you could see that
ship before anybody else you could rush
over there
with your cargo to sell or to unload
cargo that was arriving and you'd beat
all your competitors so that's what
drove them now Galileo got a whiff of
this idea and made his own telescope and
he used it with the intention of
studying planetary motion and the moon
so he completely changed the intent of
use which led to further changes in the
capability of the instrument so over the
centuries until now Telesca p evolved
from the optical view to seeing the
unseeable beyond the visible light from
gamma rays to x-rays this
early image from the Hubble telescope I
always think dude those are galaxies
those are [__] galaxies
so the evolutionary path of the
telescope along with developments in
optics and physics has brought us the
ability to see the births and deaths of
stars and to measure the rate of
expansion of the universe pretty cool
so microscope took a similar path again
the Dutch Jansen microscope was likely
developed around 1595 so in this picture
you see again evidence of Galileo's
improvement although he soon returned to
the telescope in the sky as his primary
interest um Quinn Robert Hooke looked at
a slice of cork in a microscope that he
designed he saw what he what reminded
him of the cells in a monastery and the
structure of the cork and he called
themselves and that's where that word
came from in biology so we keep going
now five years later fan Lewin Hooke
improved on the design again so he was a
Draper and he was interested in
microscopes to see the quality of the
threads in the fabric he was working
with
but he started fooling around and one
day he was looking at a drop of water
and he found something extraordinary
little Wiggly live things tiny little
Wiggly things he calls them animals
other people started to study them and
this was the birth of the field of
microbiology capability and intent and
that dance again this movie shows a
high-resolution electron microscope
study of the dynamics of carbon atoms at
the edges of a hole in a single atomic
layer of graphene and I want to say dude
we are looking at moving atoms and this
was made in 2008 so the dance continues
I'm gonna switch gears a little but
we're still talking about capability in
antennae I've always been
fascinated by flight simulators so the
link trainer was used between 1930 and
1950 in the United States and it was a
crude device aimed at training pilots
quickly to use the controls in a plane
and to respond properly to
communications images and commands and
this is the cockpit of one of the later
models of the link trainer which was
hatefully called the blue box by about
every pilot who used it now compare this
to the 737 flight simulator developed by
Evan Evans & Sutherland this one in 1999
so an actual cockpit with quote working
instruments was used the sky is streamed
by in computer graphics so you had this
realistic view and the whole thing was
on a huge motion platform that could
roll around and imitate turbulence and
really give the pilot the sense of what
was going what was going to feel like to
fly that aircraft the motion platform by
the way would go into pay play important
roles and theme parks if you've ever had
seen Star Tours or that wonderful Star
Trek exhibit at the Hilton that's gone
now and filmmaking right so motion
platform's took kind of life of their
own and speaking of Ivan Sutherland of
evidence in Sutherland
he and his team invented the first
head-mounted interactive stereoscopic
display even though he was blind in one
eye that's just an interesting little
Ted bet
Sutherlands goal was to create a system
that would present a slightly different
view to each eye and be driven by the
gaze of the wearer of the device and
this earned him the moniker father or a
parent of virtual reality whatever okay
then new intense showed up in VR
technology when I first saw a VR in 1986
I was a Scott Fischer's lab at NASA Ames
Research Laboratory and there they were
using vector Bay
Villar and we're talking green vectors
for astronaut training they got better I
lords got away from NASA in 1989 to
start our first crash dummy company
called telepresence research with the
help of Tim Leary Joe Ichi Ito and their
contacts in Japan we've got enough
funding to run the thing for one year we
wanted to make VR for other intense than
training and to explore other
capabilities including advances in
binaural sound by Scott Pfister in
Elizabeth Wenzel the the boom
telepresence remote remote presents
viewing device built by Mark Wallace at
fixed-base labs of course VR was just
too expensive for primetime so I left it
was fine so a longtime friend and
collaborator Rachel Strickland and I
decided we were going to do this thing
Rachel had worked at telepresence we
applied for a grant at the Banff Centre
we got it in the meantime I joined
internal research they threw down some
money and we ended up putting together
another band of wonderful geniuses some
of them repeat offenders
Michael name mark was an interactive
artist that you may know my dear spousal
unit Rob Tao he always claims I locked
him in a windowless room to write code
no response Steve Saunders other folks
we fooled around with different ways of
capturing the natural environment so in
an auditory way modeling a cave or with
as you can see in the top panes here a
virtual relief projection that would use
video of a waterfall on a screen shaped
like the waterfall in the virtual world
so our schedule was nuts but we were
able to create multiple worlds support
multiple players with two hands separate
direction of gaze from intended
direction of movement give them the
opportunity to embody different animals
with different sensoria not bad for a
design statement
we're proud of that work shark Davies
another little bit of history here for
you using much the same team took it to
another level I think with her VR piece
Osmos in 1995 so her unique contribution
here it seems to me was the UI strategy
she was a scuba diver and she wanted
folks to experience that scuba diver
thing so she made a strap that was
sensitive to the expansion of the chest
so you could navigate like a diver if
you breathe in you would go up if you
breathe out you would go down it could
change direction by turning your body
and after one minute and the system
people would look like they were doing
Taichi and when they got out of it I
mean this was a traverse of manageable
landscapes with what's amazing stuff
going on in there
people who got out of that installation
and clearly the guy who first put it in
place had reported profound spiritual
experiences so that's pretty cool so
we've looked at some of the dances
between capability intent and the
development of new technologies and
interactive affordances I want to
recommend adding an intent that's
opening some new doors and that is
intent for the good and I know all you
artists out there saying oh we have that
we have that well let me explain to you
what I kind of mean by that so we can
move forward with the conversation at
least so here are some Universal
qualities of what we call the good and
they're expressed by at least six of the
spiritual practices I've sampled here so
this gives us a start and what we're
talking about I'm going to zoom in on
the Stoics they fascinate me
they're overarching goal was to maximize
pleasure for all beings they formulated
a philosophy that looked at their
response
ability towards various entities as a
way of reaching that goal and they
described their process as exercising
compassion and setting good examples at
every level that they were engaged in so
if you look at this graph you can also
kind of see it as a set of nested
entities right where we start with the
self we end up with nature and and this
is really similar to what we mean when
we talk about a principle of nature that
the Stoics did not have the tools to
know about and that is the Gaia
principle James Lovelock is credited
with the Gaia principle although several
others before him had had similar
thoughts but without the tools to study
them in the same way as the entities and
our microbiomes are part of our bodies
the Gaia principle says our bodies are
part of Gaia's body all the bodies
nested entities all the way down lynn
margulis who joined Lovelock in this
quest to make real science out of
something that sounded pretty woowoo
brought the thing forward to the
scientific community with a landmark
book called symbiotic planet a new look
at evolution and it was her influence
along with love luxe continuing
scientific work that brought the Gaia
principle into mainstream scientific
acceptance by about 2010 so in terms of
relations and we're like mitochondria in
the body of gaia and we may also call
ourselves
[Music]
the eyes of the world because after all
we're the ones that invented the
instrumentality to look back at it and
see it right I want to show you some
recent works that I've seen that I think
illustrate something of a guy in
perspective in VR and AR so this is a
work by Tamiko teal you may know her
early work on Manzanar she's just been
blooming lately her artist statement
explains that perturbations in the
natural order have torn the fabric of
space-time and unexpected growths are
seeping into our world perhaps from our
own future one such growth has been
discovered on a sixth floor terrace of
the Whitney you missed Museum of
American Art and here's a piece of it I
will have URLs for the pieces I'm
showing at the end of the time what are
those plastic spoons
she's imported this to other locations
this location-based a our location hi
I'm Brenda location registered BR here's
here's a piece that's quite different in
the way that it feels it's called
unseeded territories and it's an
interactive VR experience that deals
with both with climate change and
indigenous civil rights in a world
farmer the art of First Nations Canadian
Lawrence Paul use Welton and Canadian
creative producer Paisley Smith they
made the work to force audiences to
recognize their role in the destruction
of nature and to think about it
and to experience our anger and to fight
for change here the right relationship
has been broken in the pieces expressed
both rage and sadness as well as a
desire to make a difference
[Music]
here is being ripped over
okay music rule that's a wonderful and
the piece is just the really heart
shattering here's something yet
different again this was created in
partnership between marshmallow laser
feast and HTC buy it attempts to
illuminate the invisible process of
breathing converting oxygen into carbon
dioxide and to provide a visual window
into a scientific process that takes
place beyond human perception so
visitors would step through this canvas
and the particles that they admit are
oxygen particles I'm sorry are carbon
dioxide the particles inside the tree
are oxygen multiple viewers with
untethered headsets you're seeing a
screen projection oh my god they're
going inside that tree do you just love
that I love it so those are some
different kinds of works but they're all
kind of headed I think in a gyein
direction so humid caught human-caused
climate change probably began with rice
farming about 6,000 years ago and it was
invisible to those ancient farmers but
we know now that this began a reversal
of the effects of the Mikhaylovich
cycles and plain talk scientists in the
1970s were predicting an imminent ice
age and then they began to discover the
build-up of carbon dioxide and methane
from the animals in agriculture that
come in with the advent of farming and
learned that we only been adding to that
build up in our atmosphere with both
agriculture and industry until now
Rob Tao puts it this way we're Venus
forming the earth because we are in
wrong relationship with Gaia we cannot
stop and simply let nature take its
course
instead of being strip miners we need to
be gardeners paying attention to and in
right relation with the cycles and
entities of Gaia
so we can't eliminate agriculture yes
although I know people are working on it
so I'm taking you back to the beginning
of this talk here's an intent to help
children connect with where food comes
up and how it is responsibly raised you
know many schools have Gardens these
days thanks to the example set by Alice
Waters the the chef of the fabulous Chez
Panisse restaurant and a collaboration
with Martin Luther King junior middle
school started the first school yard
garden in 1995 and has since ground that
effort and it's spread around the
country and the food that's grown by the
kids is now approved to be used in the
school lunch program so this is starting
to go on and I ask myself as a thought
experiment well how come they are or VR
are some mix of reality components take
take a lead in helping children with a
school gardens so I put together a
scenario as a kind of research request
or funding request okay
so the kids are planning they're ready
to begin planting and they scan the
sensors in the soil to look at moisture
minerals soil conditions they decide to
plant tomatoes where they did last year
and they know the companion plants are
spinach and carrots so that group as it
takes off one of the kids says well last
year the tomatoes had brown spots on
their bottoms and another child opens
his lunchbox and it's full of fish heads
and he says my mother plants these with
the tomatoes and that doesn't happen and
the children are like okay okay we'll
use it so one group chooses corn beans
and squash the staples of the Native
American diet and they're considering
how to arrange their planets so a blah
blah girl shows that and avatar she
tells the three sisters legend the corn
was the pull the beans climb the corn
the squash provides shade that maintains
the moisture and the kid says but how
how does that work but the girl vanishes
with a smile so the children are
planting this three sisters and they're
still wondering how the beans make the
soil more fertile so one of them says
you know what it's time to ask Alice and
Alice says beans and soil-dwelling
bacteria have a symbiotic relationship
that means they have a special
partnership the bacteria taking nitrogen
from the air in the soil and feed it to
the plants and the plants produce
carbohydrates that feed the bacteria the
child says but why don't we just get a
bag of fertilizer farmers use that a lot
and Alice says well there's plenty of
fertilizer in the chicken coop you know
fertilizer can have bad consequences of
people use too much or the wrong kind
yes the three sisters I like this
picture
so what's the wrong kind of fertilizer
and Alice says well just just look at
this and she takes the children's view
zooming over the air across the
neighboring industrial farm down to the
Mississippi Delta that is clogged with
algae and floating dead fish Alice has
runoff from excessive fertilizer flows
down to the Delta and the phosphorus and
the fertilizer feeds the algae and the
algae suck all the oxygen out of the
water and the fish die a child says well
just the river can't do the fit could
the fish be okay if people use less
fertilizer and Alice changes the display
and the children lean back wisely and
they say we're gonna use the fertilizer
in the chicken coop even though it
smells bad and unless has to use the
sensors to find out what each plant
needs and we can formulate it
specifically and remember our garden our
garden is designed to prevent runoff so
one day one of the kids spots an ant
crawling on the corn and calls the
others and and some of the kids magnify
10x and they see these other bugs what
are these other bugs and and Alice says
they're aphids and they asked her what
should they do about it because it's
gross they're like eating the planet and
she says Anthony foods help each other
if it's stuck juice out of the planet
and they make a nectar that feeds the
ants and and shows this animation of
ants milking a foods which is really
barfi and everyone tells her to stop and
provides protect the ants Pied provide
protection for the aphids because of
this another symbiotic relationship but
the aphids are eating our corn and Alice
says well ladybugs will eat aphids that
there are fewer ants and there's a
simulation of a ladybug and the kids
tried a few dance and
lady Belle won't have anything to do
with it and they feed it aphids and I
need some so they get it okay all right
Oh am I getting that on my screen really
so sorry one child says you know why
don't we just spray them with pesticide
my dad does that and another replies
because we don't use pesticides because
they might kill cats or Birds or
ladybugs and another child suggests well
let's figure out about the ants and
aphids without asking Ellis so they go
in the kitchen they find the honey they
pour it on some cheesecloth they come
out and wrap it around the waist of the
corn thinking that maybe ants crawling
around Oh gets stuck in it and the
aphids will be vulnerable but the next
day a great lady bug hunt ensues well
the autumn harvest is winding down a boy
wanders over to the three sisters what
do you do with dried up corn and he yeah
I hope he woman appears nearby you know
cornmeal keeps as she says working with
a pestle in a hole in a rock well grind
dried corn you can see holes and rocks
from generations of grandmothers who
ground corn
you made your grandmother grind corn but
she's gone with a laugh
the children are planning next year's
garden they see let's try on what if so
they moved the crops around in a
simulation overlay and find that the
tomatoes will probably do better where
the some of the beans were harvested
when they were blossoming and and it
seems that there are fish heads floating
around singing a song about roly-poly
fish but the children swiped them away
boy our sad little boy moves back to the
drying corn next year we'll be in high
school didn't even get a pumpkin for
Halloween the children got them all and
a voice comes from the compo
and come over here if you would be so
kind and the boy saunters over to the
compost and a mid-sized pumpkin has
grown up from the edge of it from a
discarded seed and the boy grabs it and
he sits down laughing and he says
compost you always have the last word
and combo says indeed so here's the deal
the scenario I just gave you is
achievable much of it with current are
very near future technology so here are
the things we can already do the parts
of it that we already know how to do
traverses in Google Earth databases of
models and simulations now challenges
remain but we make things with such
intense to allow those intense to inform
new capability spaces that's the point
we could keep making what we can do
better and here's what we can be working
on what does the delivery platform look
like is it a smartphone a tablet a
hololens
how do we make graceful transitions from
AR to VR or model and simulation how
come people move elegantly between these
media types how can they move from
sharing screens to using a screen as an
individual these are problems that can't
be solved perhaps many of them have been
solved already what is lacking it seems
to me is the will to make things with
such intense and to allow those intents
to inform our new capability spaces and
the keys to right relationship our
understanding and curiosity and action
there aren't easy answers but if we know
these things we're gonna get farther
we have a responsibility to create right
relationship with nature with our
technology a stoical responsibility a
guy in responsibility so this is a
picture of my grandson Jan with some
corn grown in the family garden the
picture was taken with a digital camera
along with all the tools that are
allowing me to share it with you now
technological augmentation that we've
invented when children work with plants
or walk in the woods they can form a
bond of love with nature that will not
be broken as they grow older technology
may be designed to enhance that learning
and that love I call the actions that
take care of our interwoven environment
and communities guy and gardening this
is a good intent and that's what I'm
asking you to think about as you design
new capability spaces and new
interactive worlds thanks for listening
here are those reference